Climate and Economic Development
Climates Past and Climate Change Future
William D. Nordbaus
Economists and development practitioners have a long agenda of concerns,
ranging from obsolete capital to inadequate education. Many fear that we are
adding to this list by damaging the natural environment through a multitude of
interventions, such as the release of greenhouse gases. This paper places the
issue of climate change in the context of broader discussions on economic devel-
opment. It reviews alternative approaches to the role of clmate, contrasting an
older theory of climatic determinism With modern adaptive approaches. It then
briefly reviews concerns about greenhouse warming and surveys current
research on the impact of global warming on economic activity. The paper
emphasizes the critical need for effective policies, perhaps using carbon taxes, if
we are to attain global environmental objectives without placing excessive bur-
dens on economic growth.
P    ractitioners of economic development have a long agenda of concerns,
including the inadequacy of public and private capital, poor training and
education of workers, and counterproductive attitudes, ideologies, and
practices. It is feared that we are adding another list of potential problems to this
already heavy burden by damaging the natural environment through a multitude
of interventions, such as injecting greenhouse gases or ozone-depleting chemi-
cals into the atmosphere, engineering massive changes in land use, depleting
species in their natural habitats (even as transgenic varieties are created in the
laboratory), and accumulating nuclear weapons that could destroy human civili-
zation. As natural or social scientists we need to understand the human sources
William D. Nordhaus is A. Whimey Griswold Professor of Economics and a staff member of the Cowles
Foundation, Yale University.
Proceedings oft/e World Bank Annual Conference on Development Economics a993
  1994 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / THE woRI BAwK  355



g p ;  s"$ A 8;                     *   2~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ "  *  't'..'-  ; s . *4. i a *;
of these global changes, their potential for damaging environmental and eco-
nomic systems, and the most efficient ways of alleviating their undesirable con-
sequences. Just as once the interests of future generations dictated the conserva-
tive management of grazing and water resources, so must we today learn to use
and protect our geophysical and biological resources. This task of understand-
ing and controlling interventions can be called "managing the global commons."
This paper examines interventions for mitigating damage to the environment
from greenhouse warming-a rise in temperature caused by emissions of green-
house gases. Many scientific bodies, along with a growing chorus of environ-
mental groups and governments, are calling for severe curbs on these emissions
on the grounds that the interests of future generations are at stake. The
response, in the form of a treaty to monitor national trends and policies on
climate change, emerged from the 1992 "Earth Summit?'-the United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development.
Natural scientists have pondered the question of greenhouse warming for a
century. Only recendy have economists begun to study the effects of climate
change, the costs of slowing these changes, and alternative approaches for
implementing policies. Most of the research has focused on the United States
and Europe. Few attempts have been made to explore global warming in the
developing world, even though many scientists fear that the most adverse effects
are likely to occur in poorer countries.
This paper places the issue of clmate change in the context of the debate on
economic development. Given the paucity of data on which to base an economic
analysis, the approach must be impressionistic at this stage.
The Ghosts of Climates Past
From the age of Aristotle until early in this century, most philosophers and
scientists who reflected on the progress of nations assumed that climate was
among the chief determinants of the differences among nations. This view was
summarized in 1915 by the eminent Yale geographer Ellsworth Huntington,
who wrote, "The climate of many countries seems to be one of the great reasons
why idleness, dishonesty, immorality, stupidity, and weakness of will prevail.?
About the middle of this century, climate virtually disappeared from the
economic development literature, eclipsed by such "modern"' factors as invest-
ment, trade policies, and education. In the past few years, however, with the
threat of global warming, climate has reemerged as the centerpiece of interna-
tional environmental issues. Whereas Huntington reported on the influence on
health and economic activity of "temperature, huxiiidity, wind movements,
storminess, variability, and sunlight," today geographers and environmentalists
worry about the effects of droughts, a rise in the sea level, species depletion, and
loss of ecosystem diversity.
Huntington's approach is illustrated by figure 1, which looks at the effect of
outside temperature on physical and mental performance. The top eight curves
356                                        Clirnate and Economic Development



- ~ ~ ~  ~ ~ ~           . 0
Figure 1. Human Activity and Mean Temperature
150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 550 60  650 700 75  80 
100%
98                   F00o'    103
A196 ilsinOn   onnciuo Fc,y 11-3
94
90
950%
+2
0-100                    ~~~~~~+1
0
1-2
- A. 300 Men in Two Connecticut Factories, 1910-13.
-B.196 Girls in One Connecticut Factory, 1911-13.
C. One Man CP) in Denmark, June-December, 1906.
-- - -D. One Man (L) in Denmark, June-December, 1906.
E 380 Cigar-makers in Factory B at Tampa, Fla., 1913.
-.F. 400 Cigar-makers in Factory A at Tampa, Fla., 1913.
-G C. 3 Children Typewriting in New York 1905-6.
H. 380 Cigar-makers in Factory B at Tampa, Fla., 1912.
-    .L 1560 Students in Mathematics and English at West Point and Annapolis, 1909-1913.
Note All the curves except G and I are drawn on the same scale. The maximum in every
case is reckoned as 100.
Source Reproduced from Huntington 1915, p. 124.
show variations in wages, where wages reflect workers' productivity. The bot-
tom acrve shows perfonnance in mathematics and English by students at the
U.S. military academies. From these data Huntington concluded that maximum
productivity for physical effort occurs at a-temperature between 590F and 650F,
while "people do their best mental work when the [outside] temperature ranges
from freezing to about 5O" (p. 128).
Nordhaus                                                                   357



Many other findings spring from Huntington's imaginative interpretation of
his and others' data. One entertaining hypothesis concerned the role of sunlight.
In a tract entitled The Effect of Tropical Light on White Men, a U.S. Army
surgeon, C. W. Woodruff, speculated that the backwardness of tropical coun-
tries was a result of excessive sunlight. Woodruff's theory held that sunlight at
the blue end of the spectrum would fall on the human body and overstimulate
cell growth-as in an overripe fruit. Huntington examined data on factory
workers and found no or only slight effects from light, but he did uncover other
patterns.
Taking the year as a whole, uniformity of temperature causes low
energy; a slight rise is beneficial, but a further rise is of no particular
value; the beginning of a fall of temperature is harnful, but when the
fall becomes a little larger it is much more stimulating than a rise; when
it becomes extreme, however, its beneficial qualities begin to decline.
(Huntington 1915)
Having reviewed these results, Huntington turned to his central thesis, the
climatic hypothesis of civilization. Three important conclusions emerge here and
in his other works. The first hypothesis links climate change with the rise of
important civilizations, using Greece as a principal example. I quote the entire
summary to give a flavor of the reasoning.
To sum up the whole hypothesis of the relation of climate to civiliza-
dion, here are the factors as I see them at present. Most parts of the
world are so well populated that any adverse economic change tends to
cause distress, disease, and a high death rate; migration ensues among
the more energetic and adventurous people. Perhaps the commonest
causes of economic distress are variations in weather or climate which
lead to bad crops or to a dearth of grass and water for animals. Such
economic distress almost inevitably leads to political disturbances and
this again is a potent cause of migrations. The people who migrate
perforce expose themselves to hardships and their numbers diminish
until only a selected group of unusually high quality remains. Such
people, either as warlike invaders or in small bands, enter a new coun-
try. They may find it well populated and merely impose themselves as a
new ruling dass, as seems to have happened several times in India, or
they may find it depleted of people as in Attica. When the period of
climatic stress is ended and the climate improves, the dominant new-
comers not only possess an unusually strong inheritance, but are stimu-
lated by unusually good economic conditions and by improved condi-
tions of health and energy. Moreover since the population is apt to
remain below the saturation point so long as the climate improves, the
standards of living tend to rise and to become relatively high. Thus
many people are freed from the mere necessity of maldng a living and
have the opportnity to devote themselves to the development of new
358                                         Cliaes and Economic Devopment



ideas in literature, art, science, politics, and other lines of progress.
(Huntington 1915)
We see here the long shadow of Malthus interacting with crude Darwinism and
Huntington's dynamic-climate theory.
The second hypothesis makes the case for a kind of climatic fatalism. Hunt-
ington argues that people in the American South have "less energy, less vitality,
less education, and fewer men who rise to eminence than in the North, not
because southerners are in any way innately inferior to northerners, but appar-
ently because of the adverse climate." About other countries he asks: "What
shall we say of Russia, weighted down with benumbing cold and comparative
monotony or with changes so extreme that they are harmful?" and "What of
China under a much heavier handicap of monotony; or of tropical lands bur-
dened most heavily of all?"
The third feature lifts his work out of the ordinary run of climatic (or other)
mechanistic theories and provides a link to modem economic views of climate
change. How is it that Hong Kong or Japan-far down Huntington's scale of
climatic potential-could break free of their climatic chains and prosper?
Huntington observed that "in the past great inventions have helped chiefly in
enabling man to overcome low temperature; in the future, perhaps, they will
help him in equal measure to overoDme high temperature, dryness, and monot-
ony." He speculates, with uncanny foresight for a book written well before
Freon was formulated, that technology has the potential to improve the situa-
don in tropical countries.
In the warmer parts of the earth [alleviating hot temperatures requires]
cooling the interiors of houses. Today this is done on a small scale by
shutting out the sun and sprinkling water to cause evaporation. There
is no reason why the same result should not be produced'on a large
scale. We already know how to cool houses as well as to heat them. We
do it in ice-plants. A thousand years ago men would have laughed at
the idea that hundreds of rooms would some day be heated by a single
fire, yet we see it in every office building or hotel. In equatorial regions
there is as much reason for equipping the houses with coolers as there
is in temperate regions for equipping them with heaters. (Huntington
1915)
He concludes loftily that "if we can conquer climate, the whole world will
become stronger and nobler."
Huntington's work, along with a small library produced by other scholars, is
a healthy reminder of how our fundamental models of human activity are pris-
oners of conscious or unconscious models of social systems. In Huntington's
case the influence of Malithus and Darwin constrained his theory of climate and
civilization. It is surprising that he did not ask whether the effects of dimate
were negligible in the light of the economic pace of human invention he
described. The difference in performance between the "optimal" 60 F tempera-
Nordbaus                                                       359



ture for New York City and an 80 F average temperature in a tropical region
hardly exceeds 2 percent. Yet real wages and productivity in his day were
routinely growing at that rate every year. The real puzzle for a climatic deter-
minist like Huntington was why productivity in the tropics was so much lower
than was predicted by the wage-temperature curves. Had Huntington asked that
question, he might have become a development economistl
The Impact of Climates Present
Modem views of economic development give short shrift to dimate as the basis
for differences in the wealth of nations.' A review of a handful of textbooks on
economic development shows that the discussion of climate is confined to only a
few lines.2 The modem view of economic growth presents development as a
vehicle driven by the four wheels of capital, labor, resources, and technology,
and it is a stretch of interpretation to equate resources with climate. The recent
wave of studies of international differences in productivity has never included
climate as a determiining variable. Modem trade theorists have had difficulty
finding empirical evidence to confirm Heckscher-Ohlin trade theories that inter-
national trade is based on a region's resource base (which would include climate
along with other factor endowments).
How can we rationalize modem attitudes toward climate? One possible
explanation is that there seems little point in studying the influence of so exog-
enous a variable. A more serious possibility is that societies can adapt to what-
ever climate is dealt by nature. In this section I explore this view and then
examine some economic and geophysical data to determine whether the evi-
dence supports the earlier climatic determinism or an alternative, which I will
call the adaptive theory of climatic impact.
The adaptive theory holds that in the very long run humans beings are essen-
tially nomadic toolmakers. They can usually invent products or processes to
offset the disadvantages of climate or can by trade turn appzrent disadvantage to
economic profit. At the extremes of cold, Sherpas make a relatively good living
leading people up Mt. Everest, while deserts, free of ice and snow, are increas-
ingly attractive as retirement sites. And a region that is so barren as to attract no
conventional economic activity will probably become attractive as a wildemess
retreat.
In the short run, of course, life can be full of surprises and dreadful climatic
shocks. Homo adaptus will still be rendered homeless if hurricanes destroy
flimsy structures, if storm surges break across land that is not meant for risk-free
habitation, if farmers cultivate drought-prone land, or if civil wars destroy the
land or dampen entrepreneurial impulses. To say that human beings are adap-
tive says nothing about whether the adapted standards of living are high or low,
whether nations are at war or peace, whether the climatic shock is the straw that
breaks the camel's back, or whether policies should be designed to prevent the
laying of that last straw (through large investments to slow climate change) or to
360                                         C&mate and Econouic Development



lighten the load from other burdens so that occasional climate shocks are nui-
sances rather than catastrophes.
Figure 2 illustrates the adaptive view of climatic effects. The horizontal axis
represents a synoptic climate variable such as average temperature; the
region's productivity is on the vertical axis. The horizontal line LR represents
the long-run productivity of a region and suggests that productivity is indepen-
dent of climate. In the short run, however, productivity will be maximized at
the "design climate." I therefore represent SRO as the productivity curve that
corresponds to capital, management, infrastructure, and localized technolo-
gies that are designed for climate To. If climate were to change to T1, cool-
weather crops would wilt, ski areas would fail, and other signs of an ill-
adapted technology would emerge, with the equilibrium moving from A to B
and productivity falling from P to P1. Over time, however, the economy
would adapt, as tropical fruits replaced temperate grains and campers replaced
skiers. Once all the adaptations'had taken place, productivity would rise to
point C, with a productivity equal to the initial level and with a new short-run
productivity curve of SR,.
Figure 2 makes two other important points about adaptive systems. Not
surprisingly, the first is that large shocks have a stronger short-term inpact than
do small shocks. The second, quite surprising, implication is that, to a first
order of approxination, small shocks have no impact. To be more precise, a
small dcimate shock in the short run, before any adaptation has taken place, has
the same impact as a long-run shock, or a shock that occurs after adaptation has
taken place. In terms of figure'2, a small shock will move along the short-run
productivity curve, which is tangent to the long-run productivity curve at the
initial point.
Many objections can be raised to the adaptive view in figure 2. One valid
objection is simply that some aspects of social or natural systems either cannot
adapt or adapt so slowly that significant damage cannot be avoided. Forest
ecosystems, coral reefs, cultural treasures such as Venice, wildlife refuges such
as Yellowstone-for these, the possibilities of adaptation seem dubious, and the
short-run curve might well last for two centuries rather than two years. A second
class of objection is that the long-run curve would not be horizontal but would
show marked losses as climate changes. Such a case might arise if climate change
involved global glaciation, if there were a shift in ocean currents that changed
the climate of the North Adantic communities into that of Alaska, or if midcon-
tinental warming and drying destroyed the globe's grain belts.
Using modem income concepts, I examine the relationship between certain
geophysical variables and different economic measures. Two elementary vari-
ables, latitude and average temperature, represent climate. Clearly, these vari-
ables are too aggregated for large countries such as the United States, which
spans 52 degrees of latitude from Hawaii to Barrow, Alaska. But for smaller
countries such as Belgium or Gabon, the climatic variables do not mask great
diversity. Figures 3 and 4 show the relationship between the geophysical vari-'
NordLesa                                                          361



Figure 2. Prducttvity and Climate in an Adaptiv E.'conomy
Productivity
Po                                A            c              U
pi       Je~             *               f 
1::  *n     ,                                    N 
SRo
Cimate variable (tempeture)
Note. LR, longupn productivity; SR, short-un produtivity.
ables and per capita incomes. Figure 3 indicates that the zone from 10  south
ltitude to 200 north latitude is an economic desert in which no country has
achieved high levels of income per capita. In the latitudes toward the polcs from
350 north or 25 1 souch. however, there is virtually no relationship between
latitude and economic performance. Figure 4 shows the relationship between
inoome per capita and temperature for a smaller sample of countries. Iln most of
the range, from a mean temperature of 40 F to about 65OF, there is no relation-
ship between mean temperature and income per capita. Above an average tem-
perature of 65S F only a handful of countries show a relationship, but no country
in this sample with a mean temperature of more than 651F has risen above the
$2,000 per capita income level.
The measure of income per capita is somewhat defective in that over a scale of
centuries human migrations will tend to equaLize incomes in differcnt regions
(although the tendency is clearly quite weak in light of current findings on the
lack of convergence among countries). In 1-980 Alaska had the highest income
per capita in the United States, and we rmfigt therefore mistakenly conclude that
Alaska has a vey fertile climate. A better measure of the economic clemency of a
climnatc would probably be the "Ricardian rene" that land in any area yields.
362                                          Climatc and Economic Daemlopment



FIgure 3. atiilude/ and Income Per Capila
Annual Income per capita (dollurs; log scule)
100,000
_                                             ~~~~~~~~o
0~~
10,000        0                                     0%tz)
Q           0
0000
-4i}    -20   0          20          400     60             8
o,0 conre vih18GDof$0 bilo to $10  afl
eCure 18GPolst $ 0 b o Q
0   0
0                   0     ~~~~0 C) 0
a~~~~ 
1001
-400    -200         00         20?         4006?                  8(00
Latitude
o Countries with 1987 GDP of more than $100 billion
o Countries with 1987 GDP of $20 billion to $100 billion
a Countries with 1987 GDP of less than $20 bilion
Note A sample of seventy-seven countries was used. Latitude is that of the geogriiphic
center of the country. Income is based on 1987 GDP per capita, using the exchange rates
corrected for purchasing power parity that were developed by the International Income
Comparison Project. These adjusted data reflect more realisdc estimates of income per
capita in the formerly centrally planned economies.
Source Income and area data from World Bank 1992, adjusted by author.
Failing that, we could examine income measured as a country's GwP per unit
area.
Figures 5 and 6 show the results of this calculation. Figure S shows the same
latitudinal result as figure 3-an economic desert in the lowest latitudes. But the
interesting new feature here is that the economic return per unit area peaks in the
middle latitudes-say between 400 and 50  north latitude and about 300 south
latitude-and then declines again at the highest latitudes. This reflects the sensi-
ble result that the high incomes in the highest latitudes (Alaska, northern Can-
ada, and Siberia) go to only a few people.
In figure 6 there seems to be more of a standoff between the variables. income
per unit area is highest in temperature ranges that are more moderate, and a
modest hump-shaped relationship is evident. But no dear threshold appears in
these data.
Nordbaus                                                                  363



FigureC 4. Temperattre ana incomne Pe Capfia
Annual Inconne per capita (dollars; log scale)
100,000
10,000    co       e            CC)
00
lsOCO )       o      o 0       CO 0
too ~  o                 %oo,                 . 
0~~~~
0 0
a  ~0               0
100II 
400          500          60           700          800           90
Mean temperature (degrees Fi)
o Countries with 1987 GDP of more than $100 billion
o Countries with 1987 GDP of $20 billion to $100 billion
o Countries with 1987 GDP of less than $20 billion
Note: A sample of forty countries was used. Temperature is the average of the July and
January maxima and minima. For income per capita, see note to figure 3.
Source Income and area data from World Bank 1992, adjusted by author.
A final word should be added to put these geophysical variables in a larger
context. Climate may have an effect on income, but the effect is swamped by
other variables. Looking at figure 5, we see that incomes per square kilometer
vary from a low of about $31 in China to a high of about $36,000 in Hong
Kong, and from $37 in Indonesia to $6,200 in Japan. Latitude explains less than
1 percent of the variance in income per capita or per area. We should surely look
to factors other than climate to explain most differences in the wealth or poverty
of nations.
The Threat of Climates Future
Climate has reemerged on center stage in the past few years as scientists have
become increasingly concerned about the greenhouse effect-the process by
which radiative "greenhouse" gases such as carbon dioxide (CO2) selectively
absorb radiation at different points of the spectrum and thereby warm the
surface of the earth. The major greenhouse gases (GHG) are carbon dioxide
(emitted primarily from the combustion of fossil fuels), methane, and chloro-
fluorocarbons (crcs). GHGs are transparent to incoming solar radiation but
absorb significant amounts of outgoing radiation. There is no debate about the
364                                             Climate and Economic Development



Figure 5. Ialihide and Incfnwe Par Uni;tAna
Incone per square kilometer (dollrn; log suclc)
100,000
10.000-
0 o
0 0  0
1,000 _
0                                 CQ
0 o  o  CS   00
100      00            0            0O            *     0
0              00 o
_~~                            ~ ~~ e  e O    ae0
o 0                         00%
a                                     0
10~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
0 
400        -200        00         200        400         600
Latitude
0 Countries wIthl 1987 GDI' of more than $100 billion
o countries with 1987 GDI) of $20 billion to $100 billion
a Countries with 1987 GDP of less than $20 billion
Note A sample of seventy-seven countries was used. For latitude and Income, see the note
to flgure 3.
Sourcea Income and area data from World Bank 1992, adjusted by author.
positive importance of the greenhouse effect, without which the earth's climate
would resemble the moon's.3 But the trend toward greenhouse warming is a
pressing concern.
The Greenhouse Effect
Concern about the greenhouse effect arises because human activities are cur-
rently raising atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases. Using the stan-
dard metric measure of the "COz equivalenet of GHGS, we find that atmospheric
concentrations have risen by more than half the preindustrial level of CO2.
Although the historical record is well established, there is great uncertainty
about the potential for future climate change. On the basis of climate models,
scientists project that a doubling of the atmospheric concentrations of CO will
in equilibrium lead to a 10 to 5 'C warming of the earth's surface; other pro-
Nordbaus                                                                365



111gure 6. 7iptibnerwwu4w ruan  hsouna Par f.mi A1 Aw
Inclme per nqutre lillunmvier Idallurn; log sctilo)
100,000
10,000                       0
_~~~~~~ O
1,000                         0
o                      0                       0
100                o         80    c                    00 
i   88   Co   Gb 0   
10
I1 -                          I             II
400           50o           600           70D           80'           900
Mean lemnperature (degrees F)
0 Countries with 1987 GDi' of more than $100 billion
o Countries wiLh 1987 CDP of $20 billion to $100 billion
* Countries with 1987 GDI' of less than $20 billion
Note: A sample of forty countries was used. For temperature, sce the note to figure 4. F:or
income per capita, see the note to figure 3.
Source: Income and area data from World Bank 1992, adjusted by author.
jected effects include an increase in precipitation and evaporation, a small rise in
sea level over the next century, and the potential for hotter and drier weather in
such midcontinental regions as the U.S. Midwest.
To translate these equilibrium results into a projection of future climate
change requires a scenario for predicting emissions and concentrations. Using
rudimentary economic modeling, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (ipcc), an international panel of distinguished scientists, projected that
"business as usuar would produce a 3  to 6 C warming by 2100. Economic
models tend to show lower emissions and temperature trends than the extrapo-
lative approaches often used. Virtually all the projections are worrisome, how-
ever, because climate appears to be heading out of the historical range of tem-
peratures witnessed during the entire span of human civilization.
Climate models resemble large macroeconomic models in their ability to
answer any question that modelers care to ask; it is not clear that their reliability
for forecasting climate change is any better than that of their economic counter-
parts. Climate models are currently unable to replicate actual climates reliably,
366                                                Climate and Economic Deetopment



and many climate modelers do not expect to be able to forecast regional climates
accurately in the foreseeable future. Some scientists believe that there may be
"regime changes" in which the dimate flips from one locally stable system to
another, say, because of changes in ocean circulation. Elaborating bigger and
better models will provide full employment for climatologists well into the next
century.
What are the likely effects of projected changes in Jimate? It is important to
recognize that the critical variable in most analyses-average global
temperature-is relatively unimportant. Variables that accompany or are the
result of temperature changes-precipitation, water levels, extremes of droughts
or freezes, and thresholds such as the freezing point or the level of water con-
tained by dikes and levees-are what will drive the socioeconomic conse-
quences. Mean temperature is chosen because it is a useful index of climate
change that is highly correlated with or determines the more important
variables.
Effects of Changes in Climate in High-Income Regions
What do empirical studies say about the economic impact of climate change?
Because such studies are in their infancy and research on low-income regions is
virtually nonexistent, I have concentrated in this paper on high-income regions.
Climate change is likely to have different effects on different sectors. (A 1989
study by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency emphasizes the potential
costs of climate change; a more balanced approach is contained in National
Academy of Sciences 1992.) In general, those sectors that are heavily dependent
on naturally occurring rainfall, runoff, or temperatures will be most sensitive to
dimate change. In reality, however, most economic activity in high-income
countries has litde direct interaction with climate. Cardiovascular surgery and
miicroprocessor fabrication, for example, are unlikely to be affected by climate
change, and the same is true of mining, manufacturing, communications, and
most services-sectors that comprise 80 to 85 percent of gross domestc product
(GDP) in high-income countries.
Table 1 shows the results of three studies by Nordhaus (1991), Cline (1992),
and Fankhauser (1992) that estimate the effect on the United States of a doubling
of CO2, estimated to lead to a temperature rise of 2.50 to 30C. Cline has per-
formed the most detailed economic analysis, but his results are often fragile and
may overestimate climatc impacts. For example, he assumes that storms will
become more severe, whereas br th the u'cc and the National Academy of Sciences
studies conclude that global warming has an ambiguous effect on storm mtensity.
On another point, species loss, Cline selects as the . isis for valuation a very cosdy
environmental decision, that of the spotted owl. Finally, Cline's estimate for
agiculture is much higher than that in recent studies by Reilly and Hohmann
(1993) and by Mendelsohn, Nordhaus, and Shaw (1993). Cline's estmates (1.1
percent of GNP for a 2. 5 C increase in warming) are marginaUy above those in the
Nordhaus                                                        367



Nordhaus survey (1 percent of GNP for a 30C increase in warming). The results of
the Fankhauser study, which extends the analysis to the countries of the Organiza-
tion for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) and to the world, are
close to the findings in other studies: a 3 C rise in temperature yields a 1.3 percent
of GNP impact for the United States and a 1.S percent global impact.
Two other approaches are shown in table 1. First rhe study by Reilly and
Hohmann (1993) embeds the crop-yield models used to develop the iTmpact
estimates for agriculture in a model of international trade. The authors find that
trade tends to reduce the impacts by one to two orders of magnitude hs supply
and demand reactions buffer production shocks. The estimated impact of a
substantial (30 percent) yield shock, buffered by the adaptive response in mar-
kets, produces a negligible impact on U.S. and global incomes.4 This careful
study is a good example of the tendency to exaggerate losses while ignoring
gains and adaptation.
A second study (Nordhaus forthcoming), more qualitative in nature, reports
the results of a survey of experts on the economic impacts of climate change. For
a 3 C warming in 2090, the "trimmed mean" of the responses estimates dam-
ages of 2.9 percent of world output; the median is 1.8 percent of world output.
Effects of Cbanges in Climate in Low-Income Regions.
As noted earlier, studies on greenhouse warming outside Europe and North
America are fragmentary, and it is not possible to come to any general conclu-
sions at this time. In the survey mentioned above, respondents were asked to
estinate the impact on the top and bottom quintiles of world income distribu-
don. In general, all the respondents believed that the lowest quintile would be
more seriously affected than the top quintile. The estimated mean ratio of the
bottoni quintile to the top quintile ranged from 1.75 to 10.0; that is, the eco-
nomic damage to the bottom quintile from a 30C warming would be between
1.75 and 10 times the damage to the top quintile.
A review of the sparse literature on climate change in developing countries
gives some flavor of the results. Liverman and O'Brien (1992), who use projec-
tions from five climate models to estimate the impact of global warming on
Mexico, condude that "soil moisture and water availability may decrease over
much of Mexico." Although this conclusion is consistent with the quantitative
findings, it is not actually a result of the model.
A second study (World Bank 1992), investigating a global-warming scenario
for China in 2050, concludes that the prevalence of triple cropping will rise and
notes that the diversification brought about by increased multiple cropping
would appear to be favorable. The effects on precipitation and runoff pattens,
however, may offset this benefit to agriculture. Again, explicit economic
imnpacts were not assessed.
The results of Reilly and Hohmann (1993) are surprising. Assuming some
adaptation and CO2 fertilization, the economic effects on poorer countries (less
368                                        Climate and Economic Development



Table 1. Estimates of the Impact of Global Wanning
(billions of 1988 dollars)
United States                   Global
Sector                 Nordbaus   Cline   Fankhauser   Other   Fankhauser   Other
Heavily affected sectors
Agriculture               1     15.2       7.4       1.2       39.1      12.3
Coastal areas          10.7      2.5       2.3
Energy                  0.5      9.0       0.0
Other sectors
Wetland and species
loss                  -        7.1       14.8
Health and amenities    -        8.4      30.3
Other                   -       11.2      12.1
Total                  38.1
Total                    50.3     53.4      66.9
Total as percentage of
output                  1.0      1.1       1.3                  1.5       2.83
Note: Blanks denote not available.
a. From the author's survey of experts.
Sources: Nordhaus 1991; dine 1992; Fankhauser 1992; for agricultue under Otwr," Reflly and Hohman n
1993.
than $500 per capita annual income) range from $0.2 billion to $15 billion a
year. (Baseline gross output in these regions is about $1 trillion.)
Three general factors should be weighed in evaluating greenhouse warming in
developing countries. First, these countries tend to devote a larger fraction of
their economies to agriculture, especially rainfed agriculture, and thus are more
subject to the vagaries of dimate change. Economies classified by the World
Bank as "low-income" reported that 31 percent of GDP was produced in the
agricultural sector in 1987; these countries have a combined total population of
2.8 billion.There is no strong presumption that the net impact of dimate change
will be negative everywhere, but the dependence on agriculture implies a larger
economic exposure to climate change.
Second, the ferdlizing effect of atmospheric CO2 is a potentially strong mit-
igating factor for agricultural nations. A natural fertilizer, CO2 has been used in
greenhouses to stimulate plant growth and is particularly important for forest
trees, rice, wheat, potatoes, and beans. Moreover, it appears to be particularly
important in areas where water is a limiting factor-a major concern because
warming may result in reduced soil moisture. The extent and quantitative
importance of CO2 as a fertilization agent are controversial, but the balance of
the evidence is positive.
A third issue, for which there seems to be little mitigating offset, is the poten-
tial for a rise in sea level. Scientific evidence suggests a potential rise of some-
where between negligible and half a meter in the next century (apart from any
geologically induced rise or fall). This would create an environmental catastro-
Nordhaus                                                                   369



phe; coastal regions tend to be heavily populated and highly productive and are
home to a significant fraction of the world's capital infrastructure. Given the
slow pace of the advance of the sea level, however, intelligent planning for
defense or retreat could reduce the costs significantly.
This discussion emphasizes above all the tenuousness of our understanding of
the relationships not only between economic development and climates present
but also between econonic prospects and climates future. If the mainstream
scientific view proves correct, substantial global warming is inevitable over the
next century even if stringent control measures are taken; the only question is
whether the extent of global temperature rise will be modest (say in the 1  to
20C range over a century) or large (more than 3 C over a century). Pasteur
observed that chance favors the prepared mind, and in this risky area much
remains to be prepared.
Balancing Costs and Benefits of Emissions Controls
The greenhouse effect is the granddaddy of public goods problems-emissions
will affect climate for centuries to come. Because of the climate externality,
individuals will not produce the efficient quantity of greenhouse gases. An
important goal of economic research is to examine policies that will find the
right balance between the costs of actions to slow cliTnate change and the bene-
fits of reducing future damage from such changes.
The benefits of reducing emissions are realized when lower emissions reduce
future climate-induced damages. To translate this into a marginal benefit func-
tion, we trace the emissions through GHG concentrations to economic impacts and
then take the present value of the impact of an emission of an additioual unit.
The marginal cost of emissions reduction portrays the costs that the economy
undertakes to reduce a unit of GHG emissions (or the equivalent in other policies
that would slow greenhouse warming). A wide variety of approaches are avail-
able to slow dimate change. Most policy discussion has focused on reducing
CO2 emissions by reducing the consumption of fossil fuels through energy con-
servation, nonfossil energy sources (some would even contemplate nuclear
power), and other measures. Such policies could be implemented through car-
bon taxes, although some observers prefer regulations such as tradable emis-
sions permits. Other approaches include reforestation to remove CO2 from the
atmosphere and more stringent controls on CFcs. Another option definitely not
in the environmentally correct package would be to offset greenhouse warming
through climatic engineering, primarily through measures to change the albedo
(reflectivity) of the earth.
From an economic point of view, cost-beneficial policies are ones in which the
marginal costs are balanced with the marinal benefits of emissions reductions.
The pure market solution is one with no emissions reductions; the marginal
benefits are far above the zero marginal costs. Whatever the approach, econo-
mists emphasize the importance of cost-effectiveness-that is, structuring poli-
370                                         Cimate and Economic Development



cies to get the maximum reduction in harmful climatic change for a given level of
expenditure. Cost-effectiveness requires that marginal abatement costs be equal-
ized for every process of production and consumption and in every region; the
stronger cost-benefit test requires that these costs equal the marginal benefits
from slowing climate change.
Sketching the optimal policy demands little more than pencil, paper, and a
rudimentary understanding of intermediate economics. To move from theory to
useful empirical models, however, requires the development of a wide variety of
empirical economic and geophysical models. Work has progressed to the point
where economics and natural science can be integrated to estimate optimal
control strategies.
Nordhaus (1991) contains a simple cost-benefit analysis for determining the
optimal steady-state control of CO2 and other greenhouse gases on the basis of a
comparative-statics framework. This study came to a middle-of-the-road con-
clusion that the threat of greenhouse warming was sufficient to justify low-cost
steps to slow the pace of climate change. A more complete elaboration uses what
I call the DICE model, shorthand for a dynamic integrated model of climate and
the economy (see Nordhaus 1993; complete documentation and analysis are in
Nordhaus forthcoming). The model calculates the optnimal path for both capital
accumulation and reduction of GHG emissions in the framework of the Ramsey
(1928) model of intertemporal choice. The resulting trajectory can be inter-
preted as the most efficient path for slowing climate change given inputs and
technologies; an alternate interpretation is as a competitive market equilibrium
in which externalities or spillover effects are corrected using the appropriate
social prices for GHGs.
The model questions whether it is better to consume goods and services,
invest in productive capital, or slow climate change through redurtion of GHG
emissions. The optimal path is one that maximizes an objective function that is
the discounted sum of the utilities of consumption per capita. Consumption and
investment are constrained by a conventional set of economic relationships
(Cobb-Douglas production function, capital-balance equation, and so forth)
and by a novel set of aggregate geophysical constraints (interrelating economic
activity, GHG emissions and concentrations, climate change, costs of abatement,
and impacts from climate change). The impact function is based on the discus-
sion in the preceding section, while other relationships are drawn from sources
in economics and the natural sciences.
To give the flavor of the results, we will consider the economic optimum and
compare it with two alternative policies that have been proposed by govem-
ments or by the environmental community: stabilization of GHG eniissions at 80
percent of 1990 levels, and stabilization of climate so that the change in global
average temperature is limited to no more than 0.20 C per decade, with an
ultimate limtit of 1.5 C.
Solving the model for the three policies produces a time sequence of consump-
tion, investment, Limitation of GHG emissions, and carbon taxes. The carbon
Nordhaus                                                       371



taxes can be interpreted as the taxes on GHGS (or the regulatory equivalent-say,
in auctionable emissions rights) that would lead to the emissions levels required
to attain the policy objectives described in the preceding paragraph.
Table 2 illustrates the results of the model runs. The first column shows the
necessary reductions in emissions for GHGS (including CO2 and cics). The sec-
ond column shows the estimated carbon taxes necessary to produce the emis-
sions reductions in a market economy. For calibration purposes, a carbon tax of
$100 a ton would raise coal prices in the United States by about $70 a ton (or
300 percent), would increase oil prices by about $8 a barrel, and would raise
about $200 billion in revenues (before taking account of emissions reductions).
The economic optimum produces relatively modest carbon taxes, rising from
about $5 a ton carbon to about $20 a ton by the end of the next century. The
stabilization scenarios require much more stringent restraints. For emissions
stabilization, the carbon tax would rise from about $40 a ton carbon currently
to about $500 a ton carbon late in the next century; climate stabilization
involves a rise in carbon taxes from more than $100 a ton today to nearly
$1,000 a ton by the end of the next century.
We can also inquire into the estimated net economic impact in the model of
alternative approaches. For the global economy, the economic optimum has a
value over no controls of $270 billion (in terms of the discounted present value
measured in 1990 consumption). Stabilizing emissions at 80 percent of 1990
levels leads to a net-present-value loss of about $11 trillion relative to the opti-
mum, while attempting to stabilize-climate would have a net-present-value cost
of about $30 tillion. If these figures are annualzed at a discount rate of 6
percent, the outcomes for the three policies are, respectively, a gain-of 0.8
percent and losses of 3 and 9 percent of today's annuiM gross world output.
Several other economic studies have been made of efficient approaches to
slowing global warming. Research by Manne and Richels (1990, 1992), Peck
and Teisberg (1992), and Kolstad (1992) reach conclusions roughly similar to
those reported here. The studies by Jorgenson and Wilcoxen (see especially
1991) show a lower set of carbon taxes needed to stabilize GHG emissions than
those shown here, in part because of induced innovation.
Cline (1992), Peck and Teisberg (1991), and Kolstad (1992), as well as earlier
studies byNordhaus (1979, 1991), also determine the optimal emissions control
rates and carbon taxes. With the exception of Cline, all the earlier studies show
optimal policies in the general range of those determined here. dine, by con-
trast, proposes much higher control rates, primarily because his result is not
grounded in explicit intertemporal optimization and assumes a rate of time
preference that is lower than would be consistent with observed real interest
rates.
In the implementation of a policy to slow climate change, issues will arise
concerning the distribution of the burden among different countries. If it is
decided to reduce GHG emissions, the criteria that might be proposed for burden
sharing are many. Should the reductions be parceled out on the basis of income
372                                        Climate and Economic Development



Table 2. Alternative Policiesfor Slowing Climate Change
(1990 dollars)
A nnulited
global impact
Conrral rate. 1995   Carbon tax, 1995    (billions of
Policy options                          (percent)a      (dollarsJb    1990 dollars*
Optimal poliCy                            8.80             5.24            16.39
20 percent reduction of emissions from
1990 levels                            30.80            55.55          -762.50
Stabilization of dimate                  47.40           125.80        -1,962.00
a. Reduction of grenhouse gas emissions below baseline.
b. Tax on greenhousc gas emissions in dollars per ton of carbon dioxide equivalent emissions, carbon weight.
c. Present value of difference between base run and no-control case, annualized at a 6 percent real interest rate.
Source. Authors calculations.
or of wealth? On the basis of consumption, production, or reserves of fossil
fuels? Should energy-efficient solutions be treated more favorably than ineff.i-
cient solutions? Should the carbon quotas be distributed on the basis of popula-
tion, land area, coastline, or current or future gross national product? Should
areas that grow rapidly be penalized or favored? Should emnissions reductions be
targeted to those whose past or present emissions are causing climate change or
to those who will benefit from the reductions? (A plea for justice for the poorer
nations, along with a critique of current approaches, is contained in Parikh
1992.) There are clearly no "righet answers to these political questions, but
judging from the performances of the nations at the 1992 "Earth Summit,"
distributional quarrels may well be so loud that they drown out pleas for discus-
sion of sensible policies.
Uncertainties and Anxieties
Most economic studies of climate change are based on smooth and gradual
warming. The conclusion that emerges from most of these studies suggests that
the best course is to impose modest restraints and move to other, more pressing,
problems. Given the high costs of controls and the modest projected impacts of a
10 to 20C warming over the next half century, how high is global warming on
an international agenda that includes exploding population in the South, nuclear
proliferation in the Middle East, collapsing economies in the East, increasing
cycles of poverty and drug use along with stagnating incomes in the West, and
outbreaks of violence and civil war almost everywhere?
Given other urgent concems, we might condlude that global warming should
be demoted to a second-tier issue, or perhaps even lower. Yet even for those who
downplay the urgency of dealing with climate change, there remains a deep
anxiety about future uncertainties and surprises. Scientists raise the specter of
shifts in currents turning Europe into Alaska, of midcontinental drying that
Nordbaus                                                                    373



transforms grain belts into deserts, of great rivers drying up as snow packs
disappear, of severe storms wiping out whole populations of low-lying regions,
of surging ice sheets raising ocean levels by 20 to 50 feet, of northward migra-
tion of old or new tropical pests and diseases into the temperate regions, of
environmentally induced migration overrunning borders in search of livable
land. Given the potential for catastrophic surprises, perhaps we should conclude
that one of the major concerns, if not the major concern, lies in the uncertainties
and imponderable impacts of climate change rather than in the smooth changes
foreseen by the climate models.
Once we open the door to consider catastrophic changes, a whole new debate
begins. If we do not know how human activities will affect the thin layer of life-
supporting activities that gave birth to and nurtures human civilization, and if
we cannot reliably judge how potential geophysical changes will affect civiliza-
tion or the world around us, can we use the "plain vanilla" cost-benefit analysis?
Should we be ultraconservative and tilt toward preserving the natural world at
the expense of economic growth and development? Do we dare put human
betterment before the preservation of natural systems? Should we trust that
human ingenuity will bail us out if nature deals us a nasty hand?
Faced with this dilemma, we might be tempted to say that such questions are
beyond the capability of rational analysis and turn the decisions over to abso-
lutist approaches. But in fact, natural and social sciences have an important
role to play in analyzing potential future outcomes and delineating potential
responses. Society often requires that decisions be made in the absence of
complete information, whether the decisions be in military strategy, oil drill-
ing, or research and development. In each case, a reasoned decisionmaking
process involves listing the events that may occur, estimating the consequences
of the events, judging the probabilities that each of the events will occur,
weighing the expected value of the consequences against the expected costs
under different courses of action, and choosing the action that maximizes the
expected value or utility of the outcome. Reasoned decisionmaking under
uncertainty is no different for climate-change policy than for other areas,
although it may be more complex and may require mere crossing of traditional
disciplinary boundaries.
Some might say that this calculus of costs and benefits is fine for the rich, who
possess plenty of everything and have the luxury of planning for the next millen-
nium. The logic is less compelling for poorer regions that cannot today afford to
take food from the hungry, deny schooling to the poorly tramed, curb public
health programs for the sick, and refuse transportation, shelter, and infrastruc-
ture to the dispossessed. Why, it might be asked, should the current generation,
with all its ailments and quarrels, be burdened with a costly agenda for dealing
with changes in climate-an agenda that will produce some ill-defined and
conjectural benefit for future generations that are likely to be much better off
and better able to adapt to future shocks? The answer could be that soceties,
like people, must be careful in their choice of enemies.
374                                         Chmate and Economic Development



Notes
1. A notable cxception is a study by Kamarck (1976), which observes that the tropical regions are so
burdened by laterite soils, weeds, locusts, parasites, and heat stress that, "all other relevant factors being
equal, the pace of development in tropical countries tends to be slower."
2. For cxample, see Strceten (1972), Nafziger (I9g9), and Todaro (1991). Perhaps the most striking
irony is the treatment of the subject by Todaro. He states, "It is a historical fact that almost every
successful example of modern economic growth has occurred in a temperate-zone country" (italics in
original). He then takes nine lines of a large tome, with not a single refereace, to speculate on this
remarkable "fact."
3. A nontechnical description of the science underlying the greenhouse effect appears in National
Academy of Sciences (1992). For a thorough survey, full of interesting figures and background, see the
report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (wrcc 1990).
4. For example, an earlier study of the impact of global wanning on U.S. agriculture by Adams and
others (1988) found that a doubling of CO2 would result in an annual loss to U.S. agriculture of S34
billion. After taking into account a limited adaptive response by farmers, along with international
adjustments in production and consumption, Reilly and Hohmann put these losses at an estimated $0.5
billion-S2.7 billion. Even more dramatc results were found in Mendelsohn, Nordhaus, and Shaw
(1993), in whicl the economic impact of a doubling of C02, with full adaptation but without interna-
donal trade or CO2 fertilization, was estimated to be between -50.7 and +52 billion a year (in 1982
prices).
References
Adams, R., Bruce A. McCarl, Daniel Dudek, and J. Glyer. 1988. "Implications of Global Climate
Change for Western Agriculture." WesternJournal ofAgricultural Economics 13: 348-56.
Cline, William. 1992. The Economics of Global Warming. Washington, D.C.: Institute of International
Economics.
EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). 1989. "The Potential Effects of Global Climate Change on
the United Stares." Report to Congress, EPA-230-05-89-0S0. Washington, D.C.
Fankhauser, Samuel. 1992. The Economic Costs of Global Warming: Some Monetary Estimates. Paper
presented to the International Workshop on Costs, Impacts, and Possible Benefits of CO2 Mitigation,
International Institute for Applied Systems Analyses (nAsA), September. Laxemburg, Austria.
Huntington, Ellsworth. 191S. Civilization and Climate. Hainden, Conn.: Shoe String Press.
IPCC. (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 1990. Cimate Change: The IPCC Scientific
Assessment. J. T. Houghton, G.J. Jenkins, and 1. J. Ephraums, eds. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Jorgenson, W. Dale, and Pexr J. Wilcoxen. 1991. "Reducing U.S. Carbon Dioxide Emissions: The Cost
of Different Goats.- In John R. Moroney, ed., Energy, Growth, and the Engironment. Greenwich,
Conn.: Ji Press.
Kamarck, Andrew M. 1976. The Tropics and Economic Development: A Provocatve Inquiry into the
Poverty of Nations. Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Kolstad, Charles D. 1992. "Looking vs. Leaping: The Timing of CO2 Control in the Face of Uncertainty
and Learning." Papcr presented to the International Workshop on Costs, Impacts, and Possible
Benefits of CO2 Mitizption, International Institute for Applied Systems Analyses (nASA), September.
Laxenburg, Austria.
Liverman, Diana M., and Karen L. O'Brien. 1991. "Global Warming and Climate Change in Mexico."
Global Environmental Change 1 (December): 351-64.
Manne, Alan S., and Richard G. Richels. 1990. "2CO2 Emission Limits: An Economic Cost Analysis for
the USA." EnergyJourn a. 11(2): 51-74.
-     . 1992. Buyng Greenhouse Insurance: The Economic Costs of CO2 Emission Limits. Cambridge,
Mass.: Massachusetts Institutc of Technology Press.
Nordhams                                                                          375



Mendelsohn, Robert, William D. Nordhaus, and Daigee Shaw. 1993. Measuring Ihe Impact of Global
Wamring on Agriculture. Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University
Press.
Nafaiger, E. Wayne. 1990. The Economics of Developing Con1tries. Belmont, Calif.: Wadsworth.
National Academy of Sciences. Committce on Scicnce, Engineering, and Public Policy. 1992. Policy
Implications of Greenhouse Warming: Mitigation. Adaptation, and the Science Base. Washington,
D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Research Council. 1979. Carbon Dioxide and Climate: A Scientific Assessment. Washington,
D.C.: National Academy Press.
Nordhaus, William D. 1979. The Efficient Use of Energy Resources. New Haven, Conn.: Yale
University Press.
-. 1991. "To Slow or Not to Slow: The Economics of the Greenhouse Effect." Economic journal.
101 Uuly): 920-37.
-. 1992. 'An Optimal Transition Path for Slowing Climate Changc." Science 258 (November):
1315-19.
-. 1993. "How Much Should We Invest in Preserving Our Current Climate?" In Herbert Giersch,
ed., Economic Progress and Environmental Concerns. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
- . forthcoming. Managing the Global Commons: The Economics of Climate Change. Cambridge,
Mass.: Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press.
Parikh,Jyoti K. 1992. "zrcc Strategies Unfair to the South." Nature 360 (10) (December): 507-08.
Peck, Stephen C., and Thomas J. Teisberg. 1992. "CETA: A Model for Carbon Emissions Trajectory
Assessment." Energy Journal 13 (1): 55-77.
Ramsey, Frank P. 1928. "A Mathematical Theory of Saving." Economic Jou rnal (December): 543-S9.
Reilly, John, and Neil Hohmann. 1993. "Climate Change and Agriculture: The Role of International
Trade" American Economic Review 83 (May): 306-12.
Strecten, Paul. 1972. The Frontiers of Development Studies. New York: Wiley.
Todaro, Michael P. 1991. Economic Development in the Third World. New York. Longman.
Weyant, John. 1993. aEmFl12 The Modeling Comparison on the Costs of CO2 Reductions." American
Economic Review (May).
World Bank, World Wide Fund for Nature, and State Meteorological Administration of China. 1992.
Climate Change due to te Greenhouse Effect and Its Implications for China. Gland, Switzerland:
World Wide Fund for Nature.
376                                                      Climate and Economic Development



COMMENT ON "CLIMATE AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT,"
BY NORDHAUS
Dale W. Jorgenson
In 1896 Svante Arrhenius, a distinguished Swedish physicist, calculated that a
doubling of atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide in the earth's
atmosphere would increase global mean temperatures by 4 to 6 degrees C. In
1990 the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (iPcc), an international
group of leading atmospheric scientists, estimated that a doubling of global
concentrations of carbon dioxide would increase temperatures by 1 to 5 degrees
C in long-run equilibrium and that temperatures would rise 3 to 6 degrees C by
2100, with a best guess of slighdy over 4 degrees C.
This brief history of scientific findings on global climate change illustrates an
important point: the critical features of the phenomenon are relatively easy to
grasp. Arrhenius' calculations, although based on a sophisticated application of
well-known physical principles, can be described in today's language as "back-
of-the-envelope," since they were carried out long before the invention of the
computer. Even so, the results demonstrated the importance of the wanning
effect of carbon dioxide and other "greenhouse" gases and explained why our
planets atmosphere is hospitable to life, including human life.
The estimates prepared by the nPcC, by contrast, are based on a summary of
the latest results from elaborate computer-based simulation models of global
climate, known as global circulation models (GCMS). GCMS employ physical
principles similar to those of Arrhenius but incorporate much greater detail and
more up-to-date estimates of the underlying physical constants. Although GCMs
have produced much valuable information about present and future climates,
Arrhenius got the greenhouse effect of carbon dioxide accumulations in the
atmosphere about right.
As Nordhaus emphasizes, this field of economics is in its infancy-definitely
closer to Arrhenius's stage than to that of the GCMs-but the basic outlines of the
problem are accurately described in his paper. The results are at sharp variance
Dale W. Jorgenson is Frederick Eaton Abbe Proessor of Economics at Harvard University.
Proceedings of the World Bank Annual Conference on Development Economics 1993
  1994 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / THE WORLD BAN  377



with policy approaches now in common use and suggest that economists will
have an uphill battle in bringing their perspective to bear on global dimate
policy.
The results of Nordhaus's research to date are summarized in tables 1 and 2 in
his paper. A doubling of carbon dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere over
the next century could result in a substantial economic loss. For the United
States the effect could be equivalent to a reduction of 1.0 to 1.3 percent of gross
national product. One estimate puts global damage at 1.S percent of world
product. Much careful work remains to be done to refine these estimates, but
the broad outlines are clear enough; global climate change could impose a loss of
the order of magnitude of one year's growth.
Nordhaus shows that an optimal global climate policy would produce bene-
fits, relative to no controls, of 0.8 percent of world product, or half the total loss
attributable to climate change. This policy could be implemented by imposing a
world carbon tax beginning at $5 a ton and gradually rising to about $20 a ton
by the end of the next century. This would slow the rate of increase of carbon
dioxide emissions but would allow both emissions and atmospheric concentra-
tions to rise well above historical levels.
Nordhaus's proposal stands in stark contrast to the global dimate policy
discussed at the "Earth Summit" in Rio de Janeiro in June 1992, which focused
on a goal of stabilizing emissions of carbon dioxide at 1990 levels. This goal has
been analyzed in Nordhaus (1992), using the same modeling framework as in
his determination of an optimal climate change policy. I have already pointed
out that the optimal policy produces a gain relative to a policy of no controls,
cutting the cost of climate change in half. By contrast, the goal of stabilizing
emission, if achieved at minimum cost, would produce an annual loss equivalent
to 1.6 percent of world product, thereby doubling the loss from climate change.
More stringent goals, such as those presented in table 2 of Nordbaus's paper,
have also been discussed. These include stabilizing emissions at 20 percent
below 1990 levels and stabilizing climate, which would imply declining concen-
trations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere at some time in the future.
The costs of the more ambitious goals are staggering. Stabilizing global cli-
mate, for example, would bring about a loss of 9 percent of world output, or
several times the cost of no controls. It is important to point out that the
stabilized climate would record an average global temperature of 1.5 degrees C
above current climate, requiring substantial adaptation to the new climate. In
short, Nordhaus has made a major contribution to our understanding of global
climate policy by implementing a cost-benefit approach that takes into account
the relevant economic and physical data about the interaction of future eco-
nomic growth with emissions of greenhouse gases.
The question is, in the absence of a world government, how could a global
carbon tax be successfully implemented? One option being discussed is the use
of internationally tradable permits for carbon dioxide emissions. A binding
international agreement to implement such a scheme might or might not be
378                                                         Comment



combined with efforts to redistribute wealth. This is the aspect of global climate
policy that has attracted the attention of many development economists, espe-
cially those schooled in the "North-South" debates of recent decades. Of course,
the use of global dimate policy for redistribution becomes substantially less
attractive with Nordhaus's optimal global climate policy because far less money
would bc involved.
Unfortunately, "official" discussions of climate change at the "Earth Summit"
or within individual countries have not been informed by such straightforward
calculations as those in Nordhaus's paper. The key economic concepts, such as a
carbon tax and internationally tradable permits, have been widely discussed, but
almost exclusively in qualitative terms. The goal for economic research identi-
fied by Nordhaus is to determine the right balance between costs and benefits in
setting objectives for global climate policy. Two decades of public debate on
environmental issues in the United States and elsewhere have revealed that this
goal is deceptively easy to state but almost impossible to achieve. With a few
exceptions, economists have chosen to limit their analysis to the use of economic
incentives to achieve objectives determined by others. The official U.S. position,
advanced by the Bush administration in Rio de Janeiro, is a textbook illustration
of this approach.
In fact, the situation is worse than I have suggested. Market-based or eco-
nomic incentives are faring poorly in the intellectual competition with
"'command-and-control" approaches that focus on legal regulations and engi-
neering solutions to limit greenhouse gas emissions. Command-and-control pol-
icies, now thoroughly disaedited in the formerly socialist economies, survive in
current debates over global dimate policy in the so-called market economies.
Cost-benefit analysis of the type Nordhaus has successfully applied to global
climate policy is conspicuous in practical policy debates, such as those now
under way in the United States, mainly by its absence.
judging from the discussion at the "Earth Summie'-and its aftermath-it is
possible that the economic point of view will once again be excluded from the
environmental policy debate. My own preliminary estimate is that future devel-
opment of the economics of global climate change will reveal Nordhaus in the
role of Svante Arrhenius in setting the agenda for future scientific research. I
think his paper and the work that it summarizes contain the appropriate starting
point for all future discussion of this important environmental issue.
Reference
Nordbaus, William D. 1992. "An Optimal Transition Path for Controlling Greenhouse Gases." Science
258:1315-19.
Jorgemon                                                           379



COMMENT ON "CLIMATE AND ECONOMIC DEvELoPMENT,"
BY NORDHAUS
Robert H. Williams
Ldo not find convincing Nordhaus's assessment that the impacts of global
warming will be minor. Moreover, I think he has greatly overestimated the
costs of making major reductions in greenhouse gas emissions.
Nordhaus's calculations, using his DICE model (Nordhaus 1992), do not take
into account the large uncertainties in the impacts-for example, the potential
for converting grain-producing regions of midcontinents into deserts, the inten-
sification of hurricanes, the creation of environmental refugees, and political
instability-although Nordhaus does acknowledge such possibilities. While
poor countries are likely to be the most vulnerable to the potential adverse
impacts of global warming and the least capable of taking corrective action,
Nordhaus simply argues that poor countries have more pressing problems. Per-
haps the most serious shortcoming of Nordhaus's assessment of impacts is his
failure to take into account the long-term impacts of prospective greenhouse gas
emissions during the next century.
Unfortunately, the long-term impacts of the buildup of greenhouse gases in
the atmosphere have been given little attention in climatic modeling efforts. The
"business-as-usual" emissions scenarios developed in the assessments by the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change of climatic impacts of greenhouse
warming (iPcc 1990, 1992) lead to a quadrupling of the atmospheric concentra-
tion of the C02-equivalent greenhouse gases relative to pre-industrial levels
near the year 2100. These assessments do not explore the implications of this
quadrupling beyond the year 2100. However, in a global ocean-atmospheric
modeling analysis, Manabe and Stouffer (1993, 1994) explore the implications
over a 500-year period of a scenario in which the atnospheric concentration of
CO2 (a) quadruples in roughly the time frame envisioned for greenhouse gas
quadrupling in the wpcc business-as-usual scenario and (b) remains constant
Robert H. Williams is senior research scientist at the Center for Energy and Environmental Studies,
Princeton University.
Proceedings of the World Bank Annual Conference on Deuelopment Economics 1993
@ 1994 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / THE WORLD BANK  381



thereafter. In assessing impacts it is essential to take a long-term view of near-
term actions-first because the ocean-atnosphere system will not have fully
responded to the increased greenhouse gas concentration level in a hundred
years, as a result of the thermal inertia of the oceans, and second, because near-
termn releases of greenhouse gases are irreversible.
One of the serious consequences of a quadrupling of the CO2 concentration,
according to the findings of Manabe and Stouffer, is a virtual cessation of the
south-north overturning in the world's oceans, caused by the capping effect of less
dense fresh surface water in higher latitudes as a result of increased precipitation
in the warmer, wetter atmosphere. Another consequence is a sharp rise in sea
level: 1.8 meters just from the thermal expansion of the warmed sea water, plus a
further large increment caused by the melting of continental icesheets (mostly in
Greenland and the edge of Antarctica). The latter contribution to sea level rise
depends on the extent of refreezing, which is uncertain. With no refreezing, the
total sea level rise (thermal expansion plus ice sheet melting) in 500 years would
be about 9 meters; if only half of the melrwater eventually reaches the oceans, the
total sea level rise would still be about 5 meters. In any case, the prospective sea
level rise would be a very serious impact. Furthermore, the 70 C increase in the
global mean air temperature ab.ociated with a quadrupling of CO2 is nearly as
Large as the inferred difference between today's climate and the very warm Cre-
taceous period 65 million-90 million years ago. Although important uncertainties
remain and no effort has yet been made to put a dollar value on these prospective
globsl changes, the implications of this modeling exercise, even if only parially
correct in predicting the behavior of the ocean-atmosphere system, are daunting.
It would be foolish to ignore such potential consequences-especially in light
of the prospect that the costs of reducing emissions are likely to be far less than
Nordhaus has estimated. There are major opportunities for reducing CO2 emis-
sions from fossil fuel burning at low cost, through the pursuit of opportunities
for making more efficient use of energy and the accelerated development and
widespread adoption of various renewable energy technologies. The possibilities
arc illustrated by a renewables-intensive global energy scenario (RuGES) devel-
oped in a study to assess the prospects for renewable energy Johansson and
others 1993). The assessment, commissioned by the United Nations Solar
Energy Group for Environment and Development as an input to the 1992
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (uNcm), was
carried out by more than fift of the world's leading experts on renewable energy
from eleven count -es. The options studied included hydroelectric, wind, solar
thermal, photovoltaic, and geothermal power; electricity from biomass; alcohol
fuels and hydrogen from biomass; and hydrogen produced electrolytically from
wind, photovoltaic, and hydroelectric power sources. The RiGES shows the
potential impacts on the global energy system for the years 2025 and 2050 of the
accelerated development of the more promising renewable technologies.
The energy demand scenario adopted for the exercise was one of several
constructed by the Response Strategies Vorking Group of the IPcc (1990). This
382                                                           Comment



scenario-a set of regional projections of demand for electricity and for gaseous,
liquid, and solid fuels used directly-is characterized by "high economic
growth" and "accelerated policies" and is based on an assumed doubling of
world population and an eightfold increase in gross world economic product
between 198S and 2050. Energy demand grows more slowly than economic
output because of the accelerated adoption of energy-efficient technologies. The
demand for fuels used directly is projected to increase 30 percent between 1985
and 2050, and demand for electricity, 26S percent.
Renewable technologies are unlikely to succeed unless they are a part of a
program designed to minimize the overall cost of providing energy services.
Thus the energy-efficiency assumptions underlying the accelerated policies sce-
nario are consistent with the objectves of the RICES. Because a slowly growing
economy generally provides a poor theater for innovation and RIGES calls for
rapid innovation in the energy sector, the high-economic-growth variant of the
accelerated-policies scenario was chosen.
Energy supply mixes consistent with estimates of fossil fuel and renewable
natural resource endowments and expected relative prices were constructed,
with overall supply levels matched to the IPcc demand projections, for each of
eleven world regions. The purpose of the exercise was not to forecast how a
renewables-intensive energy future would evolve but rather to see how it might
evolve under appropriate policies if society should decide that a renewables-
intensive energy future is desirable. The authors assumed that renewable tech-
nologies would capture markes whenever (a) a plausible case can be made that
renewable energy is no more expensive on a life-cycle-cost basis than conven-
tional alternatives and (b) the use of renewable technologies at the levels indi-
cated will not create significant environmental, land use, or other problems. The
authors did not take into account in the economic analysis any credit for non-
market benefits of renewables but assumed that market barriers to the wide
adoption of renewable energy technologies would be removed by appropriate
national and international policies.
In the RiGES renewable energy provides nearly three-fifths of global primary
energy requirements by 20O50, with biomass accounting foiL about three-fifdts of
all renewables. The fraction of electricity generated by renewables is about the
same; half of this comes from intermittent renewables (wind, photovoltaic, and
solar thermal-electric sources) and about a quarter each from hydropower and
biomass. If the RIGES could be implemented, global CO2 emissions from the
energy sector in 2050 would be reduced by about 25 percent relative to 1985
emissions, and this reduction would be achieved with no increase in the cost of
providing energy services. Moreover, because energy demand would be much
lower than under business-as-usual conditions, and because of increased compe-
tiion in energy markets from fuels derived from renewabic sJurces, world
energy prices would be lower than under business-as-usual conditions.
There are uncertainties underlying the RIGES, especially since many of the
needed technologies are not yet commercially available. But all the technologies
W11iuia                                                      383



involved are at sufficiently advanced states of development that technical and
economic performance can be described with a reasonable degree of confidence.
The key to realizing the RIGES is a set of public and private sector policies aimed
at exploiting the cost-effective potential for more efficient use of energy and
accelerating the development and commercialization of a wide range of renew-
able energy technologies.
Policies designed to rationalize energy prices to reflect the true costs of energy,
as well as various measures for dealing with market imperfections, are needed to
promote the more efficient use of energy. U.S. experience offers examples of the
latter: (a) energy efficiency standards (such as those for automobiles and con-
sumer appliances); (b) the federal mandate that electric utilities purchase, at
prices equal to the avoided costs, electricity produced by qualifying cogenera-
tors; (c) the new federal government-industry partnership that seeks to bring to
commercial readiness in a decade a new generation of cars that are three times as
energy-efficient as today's; and (d) state regulations mandating that utilities
practice integrated resource planning-that is, pursue the most cost-effective
mix of investments in new supply and energy efficiency improvements to meet
the demand for expanded energy services.
The desirability of accelerating the pace of development of renewable energy
technologies stems not only from a wide range of external benefits of renew-
ables, of which the potential for reducing greenhouse gas emissions is only one
UJohansson and others 1993) but also from the prospect of substantial direct
economic benefits. This prospect arises from the special characteristics of a wide
range of renewable energy technologies that distinguish them from fossil fuel
and nuclear technologies.
Large fossil fuel and nuclear energy facilities require extensive construction in
the field, where labor is cosdy and productivity gains are difficult to achieve.
The long construction periods for these systems also make it difficult to cut costs
through "earning-by-doing." In the 1970s and 19SOs production bottlenecks-
arising from the practical difficulties of standardizing designs for large energy
production facilities, from tougher environmental regulations, and from grow-
ing public opposition to the construction of new facilities-often meant that
energy from new plants was more costly than that from old plants.
In contrast, the small unit sizes of most renewable energy equipment facilitate
cost cutting as a result of both learning-by-doing and technological improve-
ments. This equipm nt can be constructed in factories, where it is easier to apply
modem manufacturing techniques that facilitate cost -reduction. Also, because
with small-scale equipment the time required from design to operation is short,
needed improvements can be identified by field testing and quicldy incorporated
into modified designs. As a result of such leaming-by-doing, many generations
of marginal technological improvements can be rapidly introduced.
For technologies with these attributes and with good prospects for technologi-
cal improvement, it will often be worthwhile to develop them as quickly as is
feasible. A detailed case study for photovoltaics has been carried out to illustrate
384                                                            donmnz



this point (Williams and Terzian 1993). It is shown that if photovoltaic technol-
ogy is developed rapidly through enhanced support for research and develop-
ment and market stimulation subsidies, costs fall much more quickly than under
business-as-usual conditions, and the discounted present worth of future net
benefits (considering only the net savings to consumers from reduced electricity
bills as a result of the displacement of fossil energy) is very large in relation to the
subsidies. An accelerated-development scenario is described that leads to
400,000 megawatts of installed photovoltaic capacity worldwide by the year
2020 (consistent with what is needed for the RIGES). For this scenario, the
present value of net future benefits is estimated to be of the order of $100 billion
worldwide, as against costs of $3 billion for the needed market incentives and a
substantial increase in the photovoltaic R&D effort (which presently costs OECD
governments about $200 million per yehr).
Of course, one cannot be sure that any one renewable energy technology will
be successfully deployed in the market as a result of such an effort. However, the
modular scale of photovoltaic and other renewable technologies makes it gener-
ally possible to pursue a diversified portfolio of options to reduce risk. This is in
sharp contrast to the situation for large-scale fossil and nuclear fission and
fusion technologies; because tlhe necessary R&D and market stimulation sub-
sidies tend to be very large, society can afford to explore only a narrow range of
alternative options simultaneously.
The World Energy Council has also estimated what it will take to commer-
cialize photovoltaic and various other renewable technologies (WEC 1993). In
the case of photovoltaics the WEC estimates a market stimulation cost of $2.S
billion to $4.0 billion, plus another $5 billion for R&D. The total cost of
development for a set of various renewable energy technologies is estimated at
$15 billion to $20 billion-a trivial amount compared to what the public sector
has traditionally spent on energy R8D. (For example, OECD countries spent
$100 billion, in 1992 dollars, on R&D for nuclear fission energy during the
period 1977-91 and probably twice that much if expenditures for the period
1950-76 are included.) The costs of developing renewables are especially small
in re!. non to the total subsidies provided by governments to the energy sector.
For example, the market value of all U.S. government subsidies to the energy
sector is estimated to have been $36 billion in 1989, including $21 billion for
fossil fuels and $11 billion for nuclear fission (Koplow 1993).
Not only is the benefit-cost ratio of pursuing an energy-efficient, renewables-
intensive energy future likely to be very favorable for the global economy, but also
the diversity of benefits offered by such an energy path would be especially impor-
tant to many developing countries because it would make it easier for them to
address many of the challenges Nordhaus believes are more pressing than the
greenhouse problem. It is highly unlikely that the economic goals of developing
countries can be realized by retracing the development pats already taken by the
industrial countries. Alternative paths involving innovative solutions offer more
promise. In trivializing the greenhouse challenge for developing countries, Nord-
Williams                                                       385



haus overlooks the potential for energy innovation-in particular, in simul-
taneously addressing global warming and broad development challenges.
Developing countries need advanced technologies not just to meet environ-
mental objectives but also to promote long-term economic growth. Some
advanced technologies can be obtained by technology transfer from industrial
countries. But developing countries also need technologies better tailored to
their circumstances than those already in use in industrial countries. Whereas
developing countries are labor rich and capital poor, many of the new technolo-
gies developed in industrial countries are labor-saving and capital-intensive.
Labor-intensive, capital-saving innovative technologies-for example, various
biomass energy technologies-would often be more appropriate for developing
countries. Moreover, the needs for innovation are different in developing and
industrial countries. Since basic materials (such as steel, cement, and glass) are
needed for infrastructure building, the basic-materials-processing industries
should be engines for economic growth for many developing countries. Innova-
tions in these industries typically lead to processes that, in addition to being less
costly, are cleaner and less energy-intensive and emit less greenhouse gases.
Developing countries cannot depend on the industrial countries for innovations
in these industries because the demand for basic materials is largely saturated in
the industrial countries (Williams, Larson, and Ross 1987) and litle innovative
activity is going on there in the relevant industries. And finally, natural resource
endowments are different; many developing countries have scant fossil fuel but
abundant biomass and direct solar energy resources.
Without support from the industrial countries, energy planners in developing
countries are unlikely to pursue innovative energy technologies. Faced with
many pressing development challenges, these planners are reluctant to assume
risks that provide only long-term payoffs. In addition, many planners have been
"burned" by past efforts to transfer advanced energy (such as nudear) technol-
ogy from the industrial countries. And the development assistance community
has also not been supportive of innovations for the energy sector. This policy
seems to be attributable pardy to the World Bank's goal of providing loans at
below-market interest rates and pardy to the widely held view in the develop-
ment assistance community that the infrastructure to support the innovative
process does not exist in developing countries.
Such problems must be addressed, and a new climate conducive to energy
innovation in developing countries must be created. The global-warming
debates could very well provide the impetus needed. As a result of the uNCED
process, many decisionmakers in industrial countries are coming to realize that
unless there is substantial energy innovation in developing countries aimed at
shifting away from high-carbon-content fossil energy sources, future energy
growth in developing countries will accelerate global warming, no matter what
the industrial countries do at home.
If the Global Environment Facility (GEF) were to emphasize innovative proj-
ects, such as its biomass gasification-power generation project in northeast
386                                                          Comment



Brazil (Elliott and Booth 1993), the development assistance community would
be off to a good start in addressing the innovation challenge. But much more
needs to be done; for example, support from industrial countries is also needed
to help build the infrastructure for the innovative process in developing
countries.
Whereas Nordhaus believes that the impacts of global warming will be minor
and that developing countries have more pressing problems to worry about, I
believe that the potential impacts cannot be lightly dismissed and that the costs
of addressing the greenhouse challenge can be kept to acceptably low levels.
Moreover, the greenhouse issue is already forcing the North to pay more atten-
tion to the development needs of the South. It could very well provide the
organizing principle needed to help the industrial and developing countries find
ways to work together in identifying and pursuing the path to a sustainable
world.
References
Eltiott, P., and R. Booth. 1993. "Brazilian Biomass Power Demonstration Project: Special Project Brief."
Shdl International Pctroleum Company, London.
IPcc (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 1990. Climate Change: The IPCC Scientfsc
Assssment. J. T. Houghton, G. J. Jenkins, and J. J. Ephraums, eds. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge
llniversity Press.
-. 1992. Climate Change 1992: The Supplwe.nary Report to the 1PCC Scientific Assessmsent. J. T.
Houghton, B. A. Ballander, and S. K. Vaney, eds. Cambridge, U.K: Cambridge University Press.
johansson, T. B., H. Kelly, A. K. N. Reddy, and R. H. Williams, eds. 1993. Renewabk Energy. Sources
for Fuels and Electricity. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Koplow, D. N. 1993. "Federal Energy Subsidies: Energy, Environme:ntal, and Fiscal Impactl The
Alliance to Save Energy, Washington, D.C.
Manabe, S., and R. J. Stouffer. 1993. "Century-Scale Effects of Increased CO2 on the Ocean-Atmosphere
System." Nature 362 (6434): 215-17.
1994 'Multi-Century Response of a Coupled Ocean-Atmosphere Model to an Increase of
Atnospheric Carbon Dioxide."Journal of Climate 7 (1).
Nordhaus, William D. 1992. "An Optimal Transition Path for Controlling Grcenhouse Gases." Science
258:1315-19.
Response Strategies Working Group of the Intergovernmental Pand on Climate Change. 1990. Emissions
Scenarios: Appendix of the Expert Group on Emissions Scenarios. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Envirownental Protection Agency.
Williams, R. H., E. D. Larson, and M. I. Ross. 1987. 'Materials, Affluence, and Industrial Energy
Use," Annual Review of Energy 12: 99-144.
WilLiams, R. H., and G. Terzian. 1993. "A BenefitlCost Analysis of Accelerated Devedopment of
Photovoltaic Technology." PulCEFS Report 281. Center for Energy and Environmental Studies,
Princeton University, Princeton, N.J.
nEc (World Energy Council). 1993. "Renewabie Energy Resources Opportunities and Constraints
1990-2020." London.
williams                                                                        387



COMMENT ON "CCUMATE AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT,"
BY NORDHAUS
Dennis Anderson
Ihave two comments: one on costs, the other on benefits. But first a point of
agreement. Professor Nordhaus is well justified in concluding that a much
higher priority needs to be given to development in the poorer regions of the
world than to addressing the greenhouse effect. When theWorld Bank team was
drafting World Development Report 1992, on development and the environ-
ment, among our concerns was that influential groups in the wealthy countries,
preoccupied with the greenhouse effect, would drive key problems of develop-
ment off the intemational agenda. We argued not only that local economic-not
to say local environmental-problems in developing countries were of far
greater importance but that the achievement of higher living standards and
economic stability in developing countries would leave them better placed to
address the global-warming problem, should the need arise. That the cost-
benefit studies of Nordhaus and his colleagues have helped policymakers con-
centrate on priorities is in itself is a major accomplishment.
Nevertheless, the nature of the global-warming problem requires that precau-
tionary policies be put in place. Nordhaus accepts this, of course, when he
argues for a modest carbon tax. But I think we need to be more specific about
the (precautionary) policies required and to look at costs and technical develop-
ments more critically. The following remarks also draw on the comments of
Professor Williams.
Costs and Technical Developments
Along with Williams, I believe that Nordhaus has overestimated the costs of
controlling carbon emissions, and I too find Nordhaus's paper to be tacitly
pessimistic in its assumptions about technical progress. Even in an energy-
Dennis Anderson is adviser in the World Banles Industry and Energy Department.
Proceedings of the World Bank Annual Conferece on Developnt Economics 2593
  1994 The Intenational Bank for Reanstruction and Development  ThE WORLD BNK  389



efficient scenario, it seems likely that the world demand for commercial energy
will rise from its present level of about 8 billion tons of oil equivalent a year to
15 billion-20 billion tons, and possibly more, over the next few decades. The
main source of growth will be the developing countries; although their per
capita consumption levels range from one-eightieth to one-tenth of per capital
consumption in the United States, they are rising rapidly. Since 95 percent of
world commercial energy demands are met by fossil fuels, and given the failure
of nuclear power as a backstop technology, it is dear that addressing the global-
warming problem, if the problem indeed becomes grave, will require the use of
renewable energy on a large scale-such as biomass solar energy from photo-
voltaics and thermal-solar schemes.
As far as we can presently see, therefore, once the (very fruitful) opportunities
for improving energy efficiency have been exploited, both the marginal and the
average costs of addressing the global-warming problem will be determined by
the costs of using renewable energy. Although other possibilities cannot be ruled
out, the costs of renewables at least provide a basis for estimating marginal and
average costs. Let us consider this further.
The marginal costs will likely be determined by the costs of liquid fuels. It will
be difficult indeed for renewables to compete with petroleum fuels. An indica-
tion of what these costs might be is provided by the example of the fuel-cell
electric vehicle, which is now under active development. Williams and others
have estimated that by 2010 net costs could fall to about S140 per ton of
carbon, given a commitment to develop such vehides. These estimates are
between one-fifteenth and one-seventh of the margnal costs of $1,000 a ton for
the end of the next century quoted by Nordhaus, whose estimates make litde
alowance for innovation and technical progress in energy supply. (As only three
words in Nordhauses paper are devoted to nonfossil fuels, however, it is difficult
to understand the basis of his estimates.)
One reason why Williams and others have estimated lower costs is that they
properly allow for the thermodynamic disadvantages of the internal combustion
engine. (Its technical efficiency is only about 20 percent, as compared with 60
percent for the fuel-cell electric vehicle.) If Williams and others were not to allow
for this threefold gain in efficiency, their estimates of carbon taxes would also be
very high, around $900 a ton. (This is more than three times Williams's estimate
of $120 per ton because we are tailcing about d#fferences in the marginal costs of
using conventional and fuel-cell electric vehicles.) In addition, we must not
overlook what might happen to fossil-fuel prices if, as is possible, energy con-
sumption in the next century were to be five or more times the amount con-
sumed in the present century. It seems likely, for example, that the world will
eventually have to turn to more expensive synfuels sooner or later (industry is
already weighing this possibility), and this too would make a differnce in the
calculation of costs.
Next, consider the electricity markets, which will probably account for more
than half of the energy market before long. (The share is now about 40 percent,
390                                                           Comment



but it continues to rise.) Two promising candidates for power generation-both
especially well suited to developing countries, where solar insolations are 2.0 to
2.5 times those in the "North"-are photovoltaic and solar-thermal technolo-
gies. The costs of both have fallen dramatically in recent years. In the case of
photovoltaics, costs have declined by a factor of S0 to 100 since the early 1970s,
and there are convincing engineering and economic reasons for expecting further
progress (see figure 1). There is consequently much commercial interest in the
development of these technologies. A perusal of the proceedings of the Photo-
voltaics Specialists Conference, held every eighteen months or so by the Ameri-
can Institute of Electronics and Electrical Engineers, also testifies to the intellec-
tual quality of the research effort in industry and in the research establishments.
Mention should also be made of solar-thermal projects, of which about 400
megawatts worth are presently in operation in the United States at costs of
around 15 cents a kilowatt-hour. The technology is modular, construction times
are short, scale economies in manufacture have yet to be exploited, and there is
much scope for improving conversion efficiencies. Moreover, thermal energy
can be stored. There is every prospect that these technologies could begin to
compete with fossil, hydroelectric, and nuclear power in high-insolation areas of
the world in a decade or so. Moreover, solar energy is not a land-intensive
resource; the land intensity of solar schemes is less than one-hundredth of the
land intensity of, for example, the Aswan hydroelectric project in Egypt.
In sum, although we cannot be very precise as to comparative costs, we do
know that they will not be too far removed from the costs of fossil fuels for
electricity generation, and there is a good chance that they will eventually be
lower than these costs in the high-insolation areas of developing countries. It is
possible therefore that the cost estimates now being used in the climate cost-
benefit models could be in error by a large order (the same could also be true of
the estimates of benefits), and there is a danger that they could mislead policy-
makers into neglecting promising developments in the backstop technologies
and thus to neglect the need for precautionary policies.
Options for Environmental Policy.
Despite the uncertainties of costs and benefits, economists need to provide more
specific policy advice than they have so far. The standard recommendations are
for carbon taxes, energy efficiency, and afforestation. But four other options, I
think, also ought to be explored.
National R&D. National research and development portfolios need to be
restructured to support the emerging technologies. Public research on
energy is heavily skewed toward nuclear power, provides little support for
renewable energy technologies, and has yet to recognize the important tech-
nological developments that have taken place over the past two decades.
Anderson                                                         391



Figure 1 Costs of the Pbotovoltakc Module
Module cost (1990 dollars per wan peak; log scale)
10,000
1,000
-
100
10*0O
1.00 0 
0.1~~~~~~~~
1970    1975   1980   1985    1990   1995   2000   2005   2010   2015
Note. All costs for years up to and including 1992 are actual; those after 1992 are projected.
The Ispread'" in the points reflects the spread in costs of different technologies that are at
different stages of development. The size of the module used also affects cost, as does thie
number of modules ordered.
Sourcer Based on a review of more than fiftyg studies and manufacturers in Ahmned 1994.
392                                                                     comment
.~~~~:   g



* International R &D. Energy research should be more "outward looking."
The industrial countries tend to be narrowly nationalistic-most notably, in
nuclear power. The emerging global energy problems provide an excellent
opportunity for a new perspective that would serve the energy industry itself
much better than have previous policies. The growth of world markets and
the prospects for good commercial investments in renewable energy also
argue for outward-looking programs and a greater degree of cooperation
among countries. Much, I think, can be learned from the working arrange-
ments of the Consultative Group for International Agricultural Research
(CGIAR).
* Investment incentives for innovative technologies. Tax incentives could be
provided to stimulate the use of new technologies in cases where "learning
by doing" reduces costs (recall Arrow's 1962 paper on this subject).
* Carbon user charges. A carbon user charge-as distinct from a carbon tax-
could finance such research and development and tax incentives. Uncertain-
ties about the greenhouse effect (not to mention the changing whims of
governments) pose a financial risk for investors that a carbon tax would not
adequately address, since investors would need to allow for the possibility
of a reduction in such taxes because of changing perceptions as to the
seriousness of the problem. It is neither reasonable, nor is it consistent with
the principles of good policymaking, to expect industry to bear that portion
of the risks of investment associated with uncertainties about the green-
house effect. If industry were in fact expected to bear them, it would rightly
favor the more "conservative" interpretations of the available evidence.
Research and development in the backstop technologies typically has a lead
time of five to ten years (indeed, ten to fifteen years if one allows for
research on manufacturing methods), while the investments themselves,
once in operation, may have lifetimes of twenty to thirty years. Hence the
financial risks are not trivial, and the effects of even large carbon taxes
could turn out to be weak. An alternative might be to "capitalize" the
incentives provided by a theoretically ideal carbon emissions tax by apply-
ing the incentives direcdy to investments in the noncarbon technologies. To
accomplish the intended effect, the incentives would also need to be made
applicable at the time of investment. In this way, if policies were later
reversed-say, because of new evidence on the greenhouse effect-the
investments already made would at least continue to operate profitably,
while plans for new investments would be scaled back without loss. Another
advantage of this approach is that the user charge, over the next ten years
or so, would be small, as the financial requirements for research, develop-
ment, and demonstration of the tecnologies would necessarily be small in
relation to the size of the industry. For instance, a user charge amounting to
less than one-twentieth of the-tax of S100 per ton of carbon recendy pro-
posed (and then shelved) in Europe would support a substantive program of
investment.
Anderson                                                         393



Turning to the concluding paragraph of Nordhaus's paper, I believe the above
policies could indeed be weighed in good conscience by the economist, in the full
knowledge that they would be likely to help-not hinder-development.
References
Ahmed, Kulsum. 1994. Renewable Energy Tcchnfologies: A Review of the Status and Costs of Selected
Technologies. World Bank Technical Paper 240. Energy Series. Washington, D.C.
Arrow, Kenneth J. 1962, "The Economic Implications of Learning by Doing." Review of Economic
Studies 29 (June): lS5-73.
394                                                                           Comment



p~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
FLOOR DISCUSSION OF THE NORDHAUS PAPER
participant said that he had found Nordhaus's results pessimistic and his
A    assumptions about costs high. In particular, he said, Nordhaus had
ignored the probability of technological changes that would be far less
expensive than the costs he was projecting. Lee Schipper also expressed skepti-
cism about the optimal strategy Nordhaus had proposed and said he doubted
that it would be possible to stabilize carbon emissions. We have a peculiar way
in the United States of pushing costs off to whoever is not voting this year, he
said. He wondered if a somewhat higher carbon tax would not be a good idea
precisely because it would send a real price signal. We do not have a way of
measuring how people respond, historically, to a permanent long-term change
in energy prices; we know only what happens during the glitches. Schipper
agreed that what Nordhaus had done was profound but said that somehow it
had irritated many people who might otherwise be supportive, either because it
was not said correctly or because it did not look correct. Nordhaus wouldn't
have to move his position very far to have an excellent compromise, said Schip-
per. Would Nordhaus consider widening this policy hole and putting bigger bars
on it, to still the critics on both the inaction and the overaction side?
Nordhaus responded first to comments about whether his results were opti-
mistic or pessirnistic. He had looked at two general sets of studies, he
explained-economic models and studies that followed an engineering or tech-
nological approach. The economic modeling studies are based on equilibrium
(supply and demand) approaches, such as that of Jorgenson (discussant). As a
consumer of other studies, Nordhaus had tried to locate his economic modeling
results in the middle of the pack. His results were actually somewhat optimistic;
Jorgenson's were the most optimistic of all in the sense of projecting the lowest
costs for reaching a particular emission reduction program. The engineering
studies are much more optimistic in that they say that 20 to 40 percent of energy
The session was chaired by Mohamed El-Ashry, chief environmental adviser to the president of the World
Bank and director of the World Bank's Environment Department.
Proceedings of the World Bank Annual Conference on Dewuopment Economics 1993
iD 1994 The International Bank for Reconstructon and Development I THE VORU BANK  395



consumption and emissions can be reduced to zero-or even negAtive-costs.
Obviously, for the first 30 or 40 percent of emissions reductions, the engineering
studies will give you lower costs. But almpsc ill the economic models have trends
that mighit be called exogenous reductions in energy use per unit of output, and
the two basically offset each other over A twenty- or thirty-year period.
However, Nordhaus emphasized, if his results were pessimistic and we should
be more optimistic, then we should have a lower carbon tax, not a higher one. If
we are going to be dotting the countryside with solar thermal plants-which is
not in thc model now-we will not need as much of an economic incentive as a
pessimistic model would imply.
Nordhaus pleaded guilty to the criticism that he had ignored innovation and
technology. He simply had not found a comfortable way to include endogenous
technological change, so he had assumed exogenous technological change. The
Jorgenson model is the only one in existence that includes endogenous techno-
logical change, he said, and it produces different results. Ccrtainly, if you
include endogenous technological change, the optimal carbon tax should be
raised because a higher tax would induce technological research and develop-
ment. This is a difficult issue, he said, and no doubt we are making mistakes
because the technology will be very different in the middle of the twenty-first
century. If cold fusion is around and is too cheap to meter, we won't need to
discuss this subject at all.
As for irritating people, Nordhaus said his role was to be an analytical econo-
mist. He would leave to others the diplomatic issues, negotiations, and compro-
mises because once you start compromising, you lose track of where you began
and of the analytical principles and start down a slippery slope. He did not want
to be offensive, but in the end he felt that the role of economists, engineers, and
other analysts was to present their analyses as honestly and well as they could
and let the numbers fall where they may.
A participant from Argentina said Nordhaus claimed that chlorofluorocar-
bons (cFcs) increase greenhouse gases, but studies by the United Nations Envi-
ronment Programme and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (ipcc)
show the net effect of cFc emissions to be nil in relation to greenhouse gases.
That must affect global models, and, to the extent that the policy of the Bush
administration was simply to control cFcs, U.S. policy would have done little to
limit greenhouse gases. More important is the issue of how industrial and devel-
oping countries will bear, share, or distribute the cost of diffierent policy alterna-
tives. Northern economists are more likely to favor a tax on energy consump-
tion, which would be the most costly alternative for developing countries. If
there is to be no transfer of payment from northern to southern countries,
southern countries are likely to oppose taxes on energy consumption.
396                                                      Floor Discussion


